TENSORFLOW_LSTM.md, before:

# TensorFlow LSTM Support - No Custom Handler Needed!

## Summary

Unlike PyTorch, **TensorFlow's native `LSTMCell` works perfectly with DeepExplainer** using standard gradient replacement. No custom LSTM handler is required. The only changes needed were adding passthrough handlers for `Split`, `SplitV`, and `TensorList*` operations.

## ⚠️ Important Limitation

**ONLY `tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell` is supported (single timestep)**

- ✅ **`tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell`** - Single timestep LSTM - **WORKS** (0% error)
- ❌ **`tf.keras.layers.LSTM`** - Full sequence LSTM - **DOES NOT WORK**

The full `LSTM` layer uses `While` loops to iterate over sequences, and DeepExplainer does not support control flow operations like `While` or `If`.

**Same limitation exists for PyTorch:**
- ✅ `nn.LSTMCell` - works with custom handler
- ❌ `nn.LSTM` - does not work (no sequence support)

## Implementation

**File**: `shap/explainers/_deep/deep_tf.py`

**Changes** (lines 746-752):
```python
op_handlers["Split"] = passthrough
op_handlers["SplitV"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListStack"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListFromTensor"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListReserve"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListSetItem"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListGetItem"] = passthrough
```

Just 7 lines of passthrough handlers for TensorFlow's internal operations.

## Test Results

All configurations achieve **near-perfect additivity** (errors < 1e-6):

| Configuration | Expected Δc | SHAP Total | Error | Status |
|---------------|-------------|------------|-------|--------|
| Small (3x2) | -1.954769 | -1.954769 | 0.000000 | ✅ |
| Medium (10x20) | 1.724232 | 1.724232 | 0.000000 | ✅ |
| Large hidden (5x50) | 7.087661 | 7.087660 | 0.000001 | ✅ |
| Large input (100x10) | 1.670745 | 1.670746 | 0.000000 | ✅ |

## Why TensorFlow is Different

### TensorFlow's Advantage

TensorFlow's automatic differentiation system already produces correct gradients through LSTM operations when combined with DeepExplainer's gradient replacement:

1. **Gradient replacement works through composite operations**: DeepExplainer replaces gradients for operations like `Sigmoid`, `Tanh`, `Mul`, etc.
2. **LSTMCell is decomposed**: `tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell` internally uses these primitive operations
3. **Automatic composition**: TensorFlow's autodiff automatically composes the replaced gradients correctly

### PyTorch's Challenge

PyTorch required a ~230 line custom handler because:

1. **Opaque backward pass**: `nn.LSTMCell` has a monolithic backward pass
2. **No access to intermediate computations**: Can't replace gradients for internal gates
3. **Manual decomposition needed**: Had to manually implement DeepLift rescale rule for each gate
4. **Multi-output handling**: Had to manually handle the `grad_output` selector

## What the Split Handler Does

The `Split` operation splits a tensor along a dimension. TensorFlow's LSTMCell uses it to separate the concatenated weight matrix into the four gate weight matrices (input, forget, candidate, output).

**Why it's a passthrough**:
- Split is a purely linear operation (no computation, just indexing)
- Gradients should flow through unchanged
- Similar to other slicing operations like `StridedSlice`, `Squeeze`, etc.

## Usage Example

```python
import tensorflow as tf
import numpy as np
import shap

# Create model with LSTMCell
input_size = 10
hidden_size = 20

lstm_cell = tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell(hidden_size)

# Build the cell
x_dummy = tf.constant([[0.0] * input_size], dtype=tf.float32)
h_dummy = tf.constant([[0.0] * hidden_size], dtype=tf.float32)
c_dummy = tf.constant([[0.0] * hidden_size], dtype=tf.float32)
_ = lstm_cell(x_dummy, states=[h_dummy, c_dummy])

# Wrapper to extract c_new
class ExtractCNew(tf.keras.layers.Layer):
    def __init__(self, lstm_cell, input_size, hidden_size):
        super().__init__()
        self.lstm_cell = lstm_cell
        self.input_size = input_size
        self.hidden_size = hidden_size

    def call(self, inputs):
        x = inputs[:, :self.input_size]
        h = inputs[:, self.input_size:self.input_size + self.hidden_size]
        c = inputs[:, self.input_size + self.hidden_size:]
        output, states = self.lstm_cell(x, states=[h, c])
        return states[1]  # c_new

# Create Keras model
combined_input = tf.keras.Input(shape=(input_size + 2*hidden_size,))
new_c = ExtractCNew(lstm_cell, input_size, hidden_size)(combined_input)
model = tf.keras.Model(inputs=combined_input, outputs=new_c)

# Create baseline
x_base = np.zeros((1, input_size))
h_base = np.zeros((1, hidden_size))
c_base = np.zeros((1, hidden_size))
baseline = np.concatenate([x_base, h_base, c_base], axis=1)

# Create explainer - works automatically!
explainer = shap.DeepExplainer(model, baseline)

# Explain a prediction
test_input = np.random.randn(1, input_size + 2*hidden_size)
shap_values = explainer.shap_values(test_input)

# Perfect additivity!
print(f"Additivity error: {abs(shap_values.sum() - (model(test_input) - model(baseline)).numpy().sum()):.6f}")
# Output: Additivity error: 0.000000
```

## Comparison: PyTorch vs TensorFlow

| Aspect | PyTorch | TensorFlow |
|--------|---------|------------|
| **Handler needed?** | Yes (~230 lines) | No (2 lines) |
| **Additivity error** | <1% (0.50%) | <0.0001% (~0.000000) |
| **Why different?** | Monolithic backward | Decomposed operations |
| **Gradient replacement** | Manual per gate | Automatic composition |
| **Multi-output handling** | Manual via grad_output | Automatic |
| **Implementation complexity** | High | Trivial |

## Technical Details

### How TensorFlow Computes SHAP for LSTM

For the cell state update: `c_new = f_t ⊙ c + i_t ⊙ c_tilde`

1. **Split** separates concatenated weights into gate weights
2. **MatMul** + **BiasAdd** compute pre-activations
3. **Sigmoid** / **Tanh** (with DeepLift replacement) compute gates
4. **Mul** (with DeepLift replacement for 2D nonlinearity) handles element-wise products
5. **Add** combines the two terms

Each operation has its gradient replaced by DeepExplainer:
- `Sigmoid` → DeepLift rescale rule
- `Tanh` → DeepLift rescale rule
- `Mul` (when both inputs vary) → Shapley value distribution
- `Add`, `MatMul`, `Split` → Linear passthrough

The composition of these replaced gradients **automatically** produces the correct SHAP values!

### Why This Works

The key insight is that TensorFlow's autodiff system uses the **chain rule** correctly with the replaced gradients:

```
∂c_new/∂x = ∂c_new/∂f_t * ∂f_t/∂x + ∂c_new/∂i_t * ∂i_t/∂x + ∂c_new/∂c_tilde * ∂c_tilde/∂x + ∂c_new/∂c * ∂c/∂x
```

When DeepExplainer replaces:
- `∂c_new/∂f_t` → Shapley value for `f_t ⊙ c`
- `∂c_new/∂i_t` → Shapley value for `i_t ⊙ c_tilde`
- `∂f_t/∂x` → DeepLift rescale for sigmoid gate
- etc.

The chain rule automatically composes them correctly to give the right SHAP values!

## Limitations

### Version Compatibility

The test includes:
```python
if version.parse(tf.__version__) >= version.parse("2.16.0"):
    pytest.skip("Test currently not supported for TF 2.16+")
```

Some TensorFlow versions may have compatibility issues with graph mode. Test results shown are with TensorFlow 2.20.0.

### Native LSTMCell Only

This applies to `tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell`. If you implement a custom LSTM cell from scratch (like `test_tensorflow_lstm_cell` in test_deep.py does), results may vary depending on how you structure the operations.

## Files Modified

**Core:**
- `shap/explainers/_deep/deep_tf.py` - Added Split/SplitV handlers (2 lines)

**Tests:**
- `tests/explainers/test_deep.py` - Added `test_tensorflow_native_lstm_cell()`
- `test_tf_lstm_native.py` - Basic native LSTMCell test
- `test_tf_lstm_comprehensive.py` - Multiple configuration tests

## Conclusion

For TensorFlow users:

✅ **Native `LSTMCell` works out of the box**
✅ **Perfect additivity** (errors < 1e-6)
✅ **No custom code needed** beyond 2-line Split handler
✅ **Works for all configurations** tested

This is a significant advantage over PyTorch, where custom handler logic was essential. The difference stems from TensorFlow's more granular operation decomposition and composable gradient system.

## References

- TensorFlow LSTMCell documentation: https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/keras/layers/LSTMCell
- DeepLift paper: Shrikumar et al. (2017)
- TensorFlow autodiff: https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/autodiff

Commit message:

Investigate While loop support for TensorFlow full LSTM layers
Investigation Goal:
- Determine if tf.keras.layers.LSTM (full sequence) can work with DeepExplainer
- Follow up on PyTorch LSTM work to enable sequence-level LSTM support

Key Findings:
- Added While loop handler to deep_tf.py
- Added TensorList operation handlers (TensorListStack, etc.)
- While handler successfully calls TensorFlow's _WhileGrad
- But: All SHAP values are exactly zero!

Root Cause Identified:
- TensorFlow's _WhileGrad creates a backward While loop for gradient computation
- This backward loop uses STANDARD BACKPROP gradients for operations inside the body
- Operations like Sigmoid, Tanh, Mul inside the loop body do NOT use the gradient registry
- Our DeepLift gradient replacements are never applied to these operations
- Result: We get ∂f/∂x (standard gradient) instead of (f(x)-f(r))/(x-r) (DeepLift)

Evidence:
- custom_grad() called for: While, TensorListFromTensor, Transpose ✓
- custom_grad() NEVER called for: Sigmoid, Tanh, Mul inside While body ✗
- Test with zeros baseline: All SHAP values exactly 0.000000
- Gradient flow verified: Operations execute, but produce wrong gradients

Technical Analysis:
- While loop inputs ARE properly doubled (batch 1→2)
- Hidden states (h, c) correctly go from (1,hidden)→(2,hidden)
- Gradient chain intact: While → TensorListFromTensor → Transpose → input
- But gradient VALUES are all zeros (wrong gradients computed)

Conclusion:
- Full LSTM (tf.keras.layers.LSTM) DOES NOT WORK with DeepExplainer
- Only LSTMCell (single timestep) works (same limitation as PyTorch)
- Fix would require ~500+ lines to manually unroll loop and apply DeepLift
- Not practical to implement

Files Modified:
- shap/explainers/_deep/deep_tf.py: Added While handler (lines 487-530)
- TENSORFLOW_LSTM.md: Documented limitation and investigation
- Created test files demonstrating the issue

This matches the PyTorch limitation: Only single-timestep cells work, not full sequence layers.

TENSORFLOW_LSTM.md, after:

# TensorFlow LSTM Support - No Custom Handler Needed!

## Summary

Unlike PyTorch, **TensorFlow's native `LSTMCell` works perfectly with DeepExplainer** using standard gradient replacement. No custom LSTM handler is required. The only changes needed were adding passthrough handlers for `Split`, `SplitV`, and `TensorList*` operations.

## ⚠️ Important Limitation

**ONLY `tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell` is supported (single timestep)**

- ✅ **`tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell`** - Single timestep LSTM - **WORKS** (0% error)
- ❌ **`tf.keras.layers.LSTM`** - Full sequence LSTM - **DOES NOT WORK**

## Why Full LSTM Doesn't Work

The full `LSTM` layer uses `While` loops to iterate over sequences. While DeepExplainer can handle the While operation itself, **TensorFlow's While gradient mechanism does NOT use the gradient registry for operations inside the loop body**.

### Technical Details

When computing gradients through a While loop:
1. TensorFlow's `_WhileGrad` creates a backward While loop
2. This backward loop computes **standard backpropagation gradients** for operations inside (Sigmoid, Tanh, Mul)
3. Our DeepLift gradient replacements are **never applied** to these internal operations
4. Result: Standard gradients `∂f/∂x` instead of DeepLift gradients `(f(x)-f(r))/(x-r)`
5. All SHAP values end up being exactly zero

### Evidence From Investigation

- `custom_grad()` is called for: `While`, `TensorListFromTensor`, `Transpose`
- `custom_grad()` is **NEVER** called for: `Sigmoid`, `Tanh`, `Mul` inside the While loop body
- Gradients flow through the operations but produce all-zero SHAP values

### Potential Fix

Would require manually unrolling the While loop and applying DeepLift gradients to each timestep - approximately 500+ lines of complex, fragile code. Not practical.

**Same limitation exists for PyTorch:**
- ✅ `nn.LSTMCell` - works with custom handler
- ❌ `nn.LSTM` - does not work (no sequence support)

## Implementation

**File**: `shap/explainers/_deep/deep_tf.py`

**Changes** (lines 746-752):
```python
op_handlers["Split"] = passthrough
op_handlers["SplitV"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListStack"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListFromTensor"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListReserve"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListSetItem"] = passthrough
op_handlers["TensorListGetItem"] = passthrough
```

Just 7 lines of passthrough handlers for TensorFlow's internal operations.

## Test Results

All configurations achieve **near-perfect additivity** (errors < 1e-6):

| Configuration | Expected Δc | SHAP Total | Error | Status |
|---------------|-------------|------------|-------|--------|
| Small (3x2) | -1.954769 | -1.954769 | 0.000000 | ✅ |
| Medium (10x20) | 1.724232 | 1.724232 | 0.000000 | ✅ |
| Large hidden (5x50) | 7.087661 | 7.087660 | 0.000001 | ✅ |
| Large input (100x10) | 1.670745 | 1.670746 | 0.000000 | ✅ |

## Why TensorFlow is Different

### TensorFlow's Advantage

TensorFlow's automatic differentiation system already produces correct gradients through LSTM operations when combined with DeepExplainer's gradient replacement:

1. **Gradient replacement works through composite operations**: DeepExplainer replaces gradients for operations like `Sigmoid`, `Tanh`, `Mul`, etc.
2. **LSTMCell is decomposed**: `tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell` internally uses these primitive operations
3. **Automatic composition**: TensorFlow's autodiff automatically composes the replaced gradients correctly

### PyTorch's Challenge

PyTorch required a ~230 line custom handler because:

1. **Opaque backward pass**: `nn.LSTMCell` has a monolithic backward pass
2. **No access to intermediate computations**: Can't replace gradients for internal gates
3. **Manual decomposition needed**: Had to manually implement DeepLift rescale rule for each gate
4. **Multi-output handling**: Had to manually handle the `grad_output` selector

## What the Split Handler Does

The `Split` operation splits a tensor along a dimension. TensorFlow's LSTMCell uses it to separate the concatenated weight matrix into the four gate weight matrices (input, forget, candidate, output).

**Why it's a passthrough**:
- Split is a purely linear operation (no computation, just indexing)
- Gradients should flow through unchanged
- Similar to other slicing operations like `StridedSlice`, `Squeeze`, etc.

## Usage Example

```python
import tensorflow as tf
import numpy as np
import shap

# Create model with LSTMCell
input_size = 10
hidden_size = 20

lstm_cell = tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell(hidden_size)

# Build the cell
x_dummy = tf.constant([[0.0] * input_size], dtype=tf.float32)
h_dummy = tf.constant([[0.0] * hidden_size], dtype=tf.float32)
c_dummy = tf.constant([[0.0] * hidden_size], dtype=tf.float32)
_ = lstm_cell(x_dummy, states=[h_dummy, c_dummy])

# Wrapper to extract c_new
class ExtractCNew(tf.keras.layers.Layer):
    def __init__(self, lstm_cell, input_size, hidden_size):
        super().__init__()
        self.lstm_cell = lstm_cell
        self.input_size = input_size
        self.hidden_size = hidden_size

    def call(self, inputs):
        x = inputs[:, :self.input_size]
        h = inputs[:, self.input_size:self.input_size + self.hidden_size]
        c = inputs[:, self.input_size + self.hidden_size:]
        output, states = self.lstm_cell(x, states=[h, c])
        return states[1]  # c_new

# Create Keras model
combined_input = tf.keras.Input(shape=(input_size + 2*hidden_size,))
new_c = ExtractCNew(lstm_cell, input_size, hidden_size)(combined_input)
model = tf.keras.Model(inputs=combined_input, outputs=new_c)

# Create baseline
x_base = np.zeros((1, input_size))
h_base = np.zeros((1, hidden_size))
c_base = np.zeros((1, hidden_size))
baseline = np.concatenate([x_base, h_base, c_base], axis=1)

# Create explainer - works automatically!
explainer = shap.DeepExplainer(model, baseline)

# Explain a prediction
test_input = np.random.randn(1, input_size + 2*hidden_size)
shap_values = explainer.shap_values(test_input)

# Perfect additivity!
print(f"Additivity error: {abs(shap_values.sum() - (model(test_input) - model(baseline)).numpy().sum()):.6f}")
# Output: Additivity error: 0.000000
```

## Comparison: PyTorch vs TensorFlow

| Aspect | PyTorch | TensorFlow |
|--------|---------|------------|
| **Handler needed?** | Yes (~230 lines) | No (2 lines) |
| **Additivity error** | <1% (0.50%) | <0.0001% (~0.000000) |
| **Why different?** | Monolithic backward | Decomposed operations |
| **Gradient replacement** | Manual per gate | Automatic composition |
| **Multi-output handling** | Manual via grad_output | Automatic |
| **Implementation complexity** | High | Trivial |

## Technical Details

### How TensorFlow Computes SHAP for LSTM

For the cell state update: `c_new = f_t ⊙ c + i_t ⊙ c_tilde`

1. **Split** separates concatenated weights into gate weights
2. **MatMul** + **BiasAdd** compute pre-activations
3. **Sigmoid** / **Tanh** (with DeepLift replacement) compute gates
4. **Mul** (with DeepLift replacement for 2D nonlinearity) handles element-wise products
5. **Add** combines the two terms

Each operation has its gradient replaced by DeepExplainer:
- `Sigmoid` → DeepLift rescale rule
- `Tanh` → DeepLift rescale rule
- `Mul` (when both inputs vary) → Shapley value distribution
- `Add`, `MatMul`, `Split` → Linear passthrough

The composition of these replaced gradients **automatically** produces the correct SHAP values!

### Why This Works

The key insight is that TensorFlow's autodiff system uses the **chain rule** correctly with the replaced gradients:

```
∂c_new/∂x = ∂c_new/∂f_t * ∂f_t/∂x + ∂c_new/∂i_t * ∂i_t/∂x + ∂c_new/∂c_tilde * ∂c_tilde/∂x + ∂c_new/∂c * ∂c/∂x
```

When DeepExplainer replaces:
- `∂c_new/∂f_t` → Shapley value for `f_t ⊙ c`
- `∂c_new/∂i_t` → Shapley value for `i_t ⊙ c_tilde`
- `∂f_t/∂x` → DeepLift rescale for sigmoid gate
- etc.

The chain rule automatically composes them correctly to give the right SHAP values!

## Limitations

### Version Compatibility

The test includes:
```python
if version.parse(tf.__version__) >= version.parse("2.16.0"):
    pytest.skip("Test currently not supported for TF 2.16+")
```

Some TensorFlow versions may have compatibility issues with graph mode. Test results shown are with TensorFlow 2.20.0.

### Native LSTMCell Only

This applies to `tf.keras.layers.LSTMCell`. If you implement a custom LSTM cell from scratch (like `test_tensorflow_lstm_cell` in test_deep.py does), results may vary depending on how you structure the operations.

## Files Modified

**Core:**
- `shap/explainers/_deep/deep_tf.py` - Added Split/SplitV handlers (2 lines)

**Tests:**
- `tests/explainers/test_deep.py` - Added `test_tensorflow_native_lstm_cell()`
- `test_tf_lstm_native.py` - Basic native LSTMCell test
- `test_tf_lstm_comprehensive.py` - Multiple configuration tests

## Conclusion

For TensorFlow users:

✅ **Native `LSTMCell` works out of the box**
✅ **Perfect additivity** (errors < 1e-6)
✅ **No custom code needed** beyond 2-line Split handler
✅ **Works for all configurations** tested

This is a significant advantage over PyTorch, where custom handler logic was essential. The difference stems from TensorFlow's more granular operation decomposition and composable gradient system.

## References

- TensorFlow LSTMCell documentation: https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/keras/layers/LSTMCell
- DeepLift paper: Shrikumar et al. (2017)
- TensorFlow autodiff: https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/autodiff
